# Introduction
Atlas Economic complexity

# Motivation
Economic trade and technological development is highly intertwined and perhaps the most robust causes of socio-economic dynamics are the global distribution, organization and movement of commodities, technologies and productibility power. Businesses, especially if they intend to sustain and grow in the long term and especially on the global level, can make good use of this kind of information (for detailed cases, see the 'Business uses' section below).

The source I propose for analysis is the data behind the Atlas of Economic Complexity. The Atlas is primarily a visualization tool which allows people to learn about countries' economic structure and complexity. In order, however, to create it, the researchers behind it had to clean and further standardize the UN's Comtrade database and to render a number of measures regarding the complexity of interchanges. This both makes preliminary analysis easier and can provide alredy useful insights for a possible further analysis.

# Data
## Dataset groups
The dataset is groped along the following dimensions:
1. Detail:
    1. Country-Product-Year ('CPY'): Lists exported product groups and their values by countries. It also includes the additional attributes generated by the Atlas researchers (discussed at data description)
    2. 'CCPY': More detailed breakdown of product destination.
2. Standadization:
    1. Harmonized System ('H0'): More detailed list of products, but is available only from 1995.
    2. Standardized International Trade Classification, revision 2 ('S2'): Less detailed but available from 1962.

## Specifications
* Size: The Harmonized Standardization (H0) data tables are almost 7GB, the S2 tables are more than 4GB.
* Format: The tables are in STATA format, which python pandas can handle with the `pd.read_stata()` function.

During the exploratory data analysis I focus only on the Harmonized System (H0) data and first only on the summarized (CPY) tables also containing the generated attributes. The columns of the two datasets

H0_2016.dta columns (i.e. data for 2016):
* year: int16
* exporter: object
* importer: object
* commoditycode: object
* export_value: float32
* quantity: float32
* code_unit: float64
* import_value: float32

H0_cpy_all.dta columns (attributes marked with '*' are generated data by the Atlas researchers explained below):
* year: int16
* exporter: objectx
* commoditycode: object
* inatlas: int8
* export_value: float32
* population: float32
* rca*: float32
* rpop: float32
* mcp*: int8
* eci*: float32
* pci*: float32
* oppval: float32
* oppgain*: float32
* distance*: float32
* import_value: float64

## Features of the data processing by the Atlas researchers
The Atlas data's differences from the United States public Comtrade database:
- The Atlas is cleaned for reporting inconsistencies.
- It uses only a four-digit product classification (instead of the Comtrade's six or sometimes even beyond eight-digit level).
- Attributes created by the Atlas researchers:
    - Distance ('distance'): "The extent of a location's existing capabilities to make the product" based on the products distance to current exports as measured by co-export probabilities.
    - Economic complexity index ('eci'): Country rank base on its export basket's diversification and complexity.
    - Opportunity gain ('oppgai'): How much a location could benefit by deveoping a particular product.
    - Product complexity index ('pci'): "Ranks the diversity and sophistication of productio know-how required to produce a product" based on other number of countries producing that product and their economic complexity.
    - Revealed comparative advantage ('rca'): Whether a country is an 'effective' exporter of a product (i.e. exports more than its 'fair share'). The bigger the value, the more important exporter the country is.
    - Country-Product connection ('mcp'): Marks whether the particular country export the specific product with an `rca` greater than 1. This also allows us to measure country diversity and product ubiquity.


## UN Comtrade
Because of the Atlas' reliance on the UN Comtrade data it is important to highlight a methodological attributes of the latter:
* Commodity values are in US dollars
* Quantities are in metric units
* Commodities are reported in the most recent classification (HS2012)
* Information about the [Harmonized System](https://unstats.un.org/unsd/tradekb/Knowledgebase/50018/Harmonized-Commodity-Description-and-Coding-Systems-HS)
* [HS codes and descriptions](http://unstats.un.org/unsd/tradekb/Attachment439.aspx?AttachmentType=1)
* [Comtrade country codes](https://unstats.un.org/unsd/tradekb/Knowledgebase/Comtrade-Country-Code-and-Name)
* [More details about the Comtrade](https://unstats.un.org/unsd/tradekb/Default.aspx)

### Data API
The UN Comtrade data can be accessed most easier through quandl which provides easy access to country/product type pairs time series data:

```py
import quandl
silk_canada = quandl.get("UCOM/SILK_CAN")
```

Besides, the UN also provides a data API service based on the SDMX standard (https://comtrade.un.org/data/dev/portal).

# Business value
The research group behind the Atlas published the cleaned data set only relatively recently, and most of their publications so far has been about country-level economic development, and much less about direct business usability. Compared to contemporary unstructured data this set also benefits from its relatively broad geographic coverage and historical continuity.

## Possible business users
- Any company interested in the technological and infrastructural requirements of global expansion.
- Production companies would like to gain an overview of their supply chains.
- Financial investors interested in the growth possibilities and the interrelationship between production sectors and national economies.
- HR specialists and educators trying to find out what skill might be needed in the future and/or from what sectors can people be retrained into areas where there is a shortage of skilled labor force.
- Governmental and international institutions iterested in trade and economic policy.
- Consultants providing services within the above domains.


# Explain analysis and plots
